WIP Look under hood (#8)
mine-cetinkaya-rundel/quarto-tdg: look-under-hood.qmd

````{.markdown}
{{< include _examples/look-under-hood/html-r.qmd >}}
````

`html-r.qmd` a Quarto document with R code cells and placeholder text, targeting HTML output.
:::

The process this file undergoes when you call `quarto render` is illustrated in @fig-render-html-r.
You'll dive into the details of each step below.

![The `quarto render` process for `html-r.qmd`](images/look-under-hood-render-html-r.jpg){#fig-render-html-r fig-alt="Diagram showing a `.qmd` file entering a box labelled Quarto, it flows through `knitr` to a `.html.md` file, then through Pandoc, exiting the box as a `.html` file along with a folder with the name `_files.`."}

### Before the computational engine

Before anything else, Quarto parses your file to extract the document header and code cells.
Quarto will determine the set of formats that need to be rendered and select the appropriate computational engine.

::: callout-tip
## Include shortcodes are also resolved

Include shortcodes are also resolved at this stage because they may contribute code cells to the document.
:::

It's at this stage you'll get errors about malformed YAML in your document header--- these start with `ERROR: YAMLError:`.

> You can learn more about common YAML issues in @sec-yaml.

Author: Yeah, it doesn't exist...but maybe one day it will

[✓] Checking Jupyter engine render....OK                 

[✓] Checking R installation...........OK                 #<7>
      Version: 4.3.3                                     #<7>
      Path: /Library/Frameworks/R.framework/Versions/4.3-arm64/Resources   #<7>
      LibPaths:                                          #<7>
        - /xxx/Library/R/arm64/4.3/library               #<7>
        - /Library/Frameworks/R.framework/Versions/4.3-arm64/Resources/library   #<7>
      knitr: 1.44                                        #<7>
      rmarkdown: 2.25                                    #<7>

[✓] Checking Knitr engine render......OK
```

1.  Quarto version
2.  Internal dependencies
3.  Quarto installation
4.  Tools installed by Quarto
5.  LaTeX
6.  Python
7.  R
:::

An example of the result of running `quarto check`
::::

### Errors from the computational engine {#sec-computational-errors}

If your Quarto document fails to make it through the computational engine there are generally three culprits:

-   The wrong engine is being used

-   The enviroment Quarto sees isn't the one you expect

-   Your code has errors in it

#### Wrong Engine

> The heuristics Quarto selects when selecting an engine are sometimes wrong.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The heuristics Quarto uses when selecting an engine can sometimes be wrong.
```

If you see some indication Knitr is running when you expected Jupyter, override the automatic choice by explicitly setting the engine with the `engine` key:

``` yaml
---
engine: jupyter
---
```

> If you want the `julia` engine, Quarto will never select it, you must opt-in via the `engine` key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want the `julia` engine, Quarto will never automatically select it; you must opt-in via the `engine` key.
```

::: callout-tip
## Avoiding execution

> For the purposes of choosing an engine, a code cell with the option `eval: false` is still considered an executable code cell, even though the code inside will not be executed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the purpose of choosing an engine, a code cell with the option `eval: false` is still considered an executable code cell, even though the code inside will not be executed.
```

This means you might see an engine starting even if you've set `eval: false` at the document level.

> To avoid even starting an engine, and executing any code, you can explicitly use the markdown engine:

Reviewer: This is a good tip!

``` yaml
---
engine: markdown
---
```
:::

#### Wrong Environment

The usual symptom of Quarto not using the right environment is the failure to load packages you are sure you installed.

> Trouble-shooting your environment is language specific and you should refer back to the relevant sections of @sec-r, @sec-python and @sec-julia.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Troubleshooting your environment is language-specific, and you should refer back to the relevant sections of @sec-r, @sec-python, and @sec-julia.
```

```
A computational error when using the `jupyter` engine

:::

::: {#fig-errors-knitr}
``` default
processing file: r-error.qmd
1/2                  
2/2 [unnamed-chunk-1]

Quitting from lines 7-8 [unnamed-chunk-1] (r-error.qmd)
Error:
! object 'x' not found
Execution halted
```

A computational error when using the `knitr` engine

:::

:::{#fig-errors-julia}
``` default
Running [1/1] at line 7:  x
ERROR: Julia server returned error after receiving "run" command:
Failed to run notebook: /Users/charlottewickham/Documents/posit/weekly-log/2024-09-30/julia-error.qmd
ERROR: EvaluationError: Encountered 1 error during evaluation

Error 1 of 1
@ /Users/charlottewickham/Documents/posit/weekly-log/2024-09-30/julia-error.qmd:7
UndefVarError: `x` not defined
```

A computational error when using the `julia` engine

::: 

Example output from `quarto render` when there is an execution error.

:::

::: callout-tip
## Keeping an error in your output

If you want to show an error in your document, set the option `error: true` in the corresponding code cell.
This will prevent the error from halting execution, and include the error message in your rendered document.
:::

> You are now in the realm of debugging your R, Python or Julia code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You are now in the realm of debugging your R, Python, or Julia code.
```

The first way to make your life easier is to label your code cells:

````{.markdown}
```{r}
#| label: get-x
x
```
````

> When the engines process your code cells, they will include the label helping you to quickly identify which code cell caused the error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the engines process your code cells, they will include the label, helping you to identify which code cell caused the error quickly.
```

If the error isn't obvious, run your code from top to bottom interactively in a clean session of your interpreter.

::: {.callout-tip}
## Run all 

> In RStudio use the command **Restart R Session and Run All Chunks**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In RStudio, use the command **Restart R Session and Run All Chunks**.
```

> In the Quarto extension for VS Code and Positron use the command **Quarto: Run All Cells**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the Quarto extension for VS Code and Positron, use the command **Quarto: Run All Cells**.
```

:::

### Things that aren't errors

Some problems don't rise to the level of errors. 

> You get output from `quarto render` it just doesn't look right.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You might get output from `quarto render` but it might not look right.
```

In this case, a general troubleshooting process might look like:

* Verify you're working with the current release of Quarto (e.g. with `quarto check`).

* Find an example of what you are trying to do in the documentation and verify it works. If it does work, gradually alter it to match your example, until it no longer works---you'll either discover what you are doing wrong, or you'll produce a minimal reproducible example. 

* Ask for help using your reproducible example.

### Asking for help

If you can't figure out the problem yourself, your next step is to ask someone. 
A good question includes:

> * A decription of your problem, including what you expected to happen and what actually happened

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A description of your problem, including what you expected to happen and what actually happened.
```

> * A minimal reproducible example (see @sec-repro)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A minimal reproducible example (see @sec-repro).
```

> * The output from `quarto check`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The output from `quarto check`.
```
